I now hasten to the more moving part of my story.
I shall relate events that impressed me with feelings which, from what I had been, had made
me what I am. Spring advanced rapidly and the weather became fine and the skies cloudless.
It surprised me that what before was desert and gloomy should now bloom
with the most beautiful flowers and verdure. My senses were gratified and refreshed by a thousand
scents of delight and a thousand sights of beauty. It was on one of these days when my
cottagers periodically rested from labor, the old man played on his guitar and the children listened
to him, that I observed the countenance of Felix was melancholy beyond expression. He sighed
frequently and once his father paused in his music and I conjectured by his manner that he
the cause of the son's sorrow. Felix replied in a cheerful accent and the old man was recommencing
his music when someone tapped at the door. It was a lady on horseback accompanied by a countryman
as a guide. The lady was dressed in a dark suit and covered with a thick black veil. Agatha asked
a question to which the stranger only replied by pronouncing in a sweet accent the name of Felix.
Her voice was musical but unlike that of either of my friends.
On hearing this word Felix came up hastily to the lady who when she saw him threw up her veil
and I beheld a countenance of angelic beauty and expression. Her hair of shining raven black and
curiously braided. Her eyes were dark but gentle though animated. Her features of a regular
proportion and her complexion wondrously fair each cheek tingled with a lovely pink.
Felix sometimes ravaged with delight when he saw her. Every trait of sorrow vanished from his face
and it instantly expressed a degree of ecstatic joy of which I could hardly have believed capable.
His eyes sparkled as his cheeks flushed with pleasure and at that moment I thought of him
as beautiful as the stranger. She appeared affected by different feelings wiping a few
tears from her lovely eyes. She held her hand out to Felix who kissed it rapturously
and called her as well as I could distinguish his sweet Abraham. She did not appear to understand
him but smiled. He assisted her to dismount and dismissing her guide conducted her into the
cottage. Some conversation took place between him and his father and the young stranger now
at the old man's feet and would have kissed his hand but he raised her and embraced her affectionately.
I soon perceived that although the stranger uttered the articulate sounds and soon appeared
to have a language of her own she was neither understood by nor herself understood the cottagers.
They made many signs which I did not comprehend and I saw that her presence diffused gladness
through the cottage dispelling their sorrow as the sun dissipates the morning mist. Felix
seemed particularly happy and with smiles of delight welcomed his Abraham. Agatha the ever
gentle Agatha kissed the hands of the lovely stranger and pointing to her brother made signs
which appeared to me to mean that he had been sorrowful until she came. Some hours passed thus
while they by their countenances expressed joy the cause of which I did not comprehend.
Presently I found by the frequent recurrence of some sound which the stranger repeated after them
that she was endeavoring to learn their language and the idea instantly occurred to me that I
should make use of the same instructions to the same end. The stranger learned about 20 words at
the first lesson most of them indeed were those which I had before understood but I profited by
others. As night came on Agatha and the and the Arabian retired early when they separated Felix
kissed the hand of the stranger and said good night sweet Safi. He sat up much longer conversing with
his father and by the frequent repetition of her name I conjectured that their lovely guest was the
subject of their conversation. I ardently desired to understand them and bent every faculty towards
that purpose but found it utterly impossible. The next morning Felix went out to his work
and after the usual occupations of Agatha were finished the Arabian sat at the feet of the old
man and taking his guitar played some airs so entrancingly beautiful that they at once
drew tears of sorrow and delight from my eyes. She sang and her voice flowed with a rich cadence
swelling or dying like a night night like a nightingale of the woods. When she had finished
she gave the guitar to Agatha who at first declined it. She played a simple air and her
voice accompanied it in sweet accents but unlike the wondrous strain of the stranger
the old man appeared enraptured and said some words with Agatha endeavored to explain to Safi
and by which he appeared to wish to express that she bestowed on him the greatest delight by her
music. The days now passed as peacefully as before with the sole alteration that joy had
taken place of sadness and accountances of my friends. Safi was always gay and happy.
She and I improved rapidly in the knowledge of language so that in two months I began to
comprehend most of the words uttered by my protectors. In the meanwhile also the black
ground was covered with herbage and the green banks interspersed with innumerable flowers
sweet to the scent and the eyes stars of pale radiance among the moonlit woods. The sun became
warmer the nights clear and balmy and my nocturnal ramblers rambles were an extreme pleasure to me
although they were considerably shortened by the late setting and early rising of the sun
for I never ventured abroad during daylight fearful of meeting with the same treatment
I had formerly endured at the first village which I entered.
My days were spent in close attention that I might more speedily master the language
and that I may boast and I may boast that I improved more rapidly than the Arabian
who understood very little and conversed in broken accents whilst I comprehended and can
imitate almost every word that was spoken. While I improved in speech I also learned the science of
letters as it was taught to the stranger and this opened before me a wide range of words
a wide field for wonder and delight. The book from which Felix instructed Safi was Volney's
Ruins of Empires. I should not have understood the purport of this book had not Felix in reading it
gave very minute explanations. He had chosen this work he said because the
the clamatory style was framed in imitation of the eastern authors though this work I obtained
through this work I obtained a curious knowledge of history and a view of the several empires at
present existing in the world. It gave me an insight into the manners governments and religions
of the different nations of the earth. I heard of the slothful Asiatics of the
stupendous genius and mental activity of the Grecians of the war and wondrous virtue of the
chivalry Christianity and kings. I heard of the discovery of the American hemisphere
and wept with Safi over the hapless fate of its of its original inhabitants.
These wonderful narrations inspired me with strange feelings was man indeed at once so powerful so
virtuous and magnificent yet so vicious and base. He appeared at one time the mere scion of evil
of the evil principle and at another as all that can be conceived of noble and godlike.
To be a great and virtuous man appeared the highest honor that can befall a sensitive being.
To be based and vicious as many on record have been appeared the lowest
degration a condition more object that than that of the blind mole or harmless worm.
For a long time I could not conceive how one man could go forth to murder his fellow
or even why there were laws and governments but when I heard details of the vice and bloodshed
my wonder ceased and I turned away with disgust and loathing. Every conversation of the cottagers
now opened new wonders to me. While I listened to the instructors instructions with Felix bestowed
upon the Arabian the strange system of human society was explained to me. I heard of the division
of property of immense wealth and squalid poverty of rank descent and noble blood.
The words introduced me to turn towards myself. I learned that the possessions most esteemed by
your fellow creatures were high and unsullied descent united with riches. A man might be
respected with only one of these advantages but without either he was considered except in very
rare instances as a vagabond and a slave doomed to waste his powers for the profits of the chosen
few. And what was I of my creation and creator I was absolutely ignorant but I knew that I possess
no money no friends no kind of property. I was beside endured with a hideously figured a figure
hideously deformed and lonesome. I was not even the same nature as man. I was more agile than they
and could subsist on upon a coarser diet. I bore the extremities of heat and coal with less injury
to my frame and my stature far exceeded theirs. When I looked around I saw and heard of none like
me. Was I then a monster a blot upon the earth from which all men fled and whom all men disowned?
I cannot describe to you the agony that these reflections inflicted upon me.
I tried to dispel them but sorrow only increased with knowledge. Oh that I had forever remained
in my native wood nor known nor felt beyond the sensations of hunger thirst and heat.
Of what a strange nature is knowledge it clings to the mind when it is once seized on it like a light
on a rock. I had sometimes wished to shake off all thought and feeling but I learned that it
was only one means to overcome the sensation of pain and that was death a state of which I feared
yet did not understand. I admired virtue and good feelings and loved the gentle manners and admirable
qualities of my cottagers but I was shut off from the intercourse with them except through means
which I obtained by stealth when I was unseen and unknown which rather increased than satisfied
the desire I had of becoming one of my fellows. The gentle words of Agatha and the animated smiles
of the charming Arabian were not for me. The mild exhortations of the old man and the lively
conversation of the loved Felix were not for me. Miserable unhappy wrench.
Other lessons were impressed upon me even more deeply. I heard of the differences between the
sexes and the birth and growth of children. How the father doted on the smiles of the infant
and the lively sallies of the older child. How all life and cares of the mother were wrapped up in
precious charge. How the mind of youth expanded and gained knowledge of brother sister and all
various relationships which bind one human being to another in mutual bonds. But where were my
friends in relations? No father had watched my infant days. No mother had blessed me with smiles
or caresses. Nor if they had all my past life was now a blot a blind vacancy in which I distinguished
nothing. From my earliest remembrance I had been as I then was in height and proportion.
I had never yet seen a being resembling me or who claimed any intercourse with me. What was I?
The question returned only to be answered with groans. I will soon explain to what those feelings
tended but allow me to return to the cottagers whose story excited me in such various feeling
of indignation delight and wonder but which all terminated in innocent love and reverence for my
protectors. For so I loved in an innocent half painful self-deceit to call them. End of chapter 13.